GIT


HANDS-ON--1
1. The Core Git Commands
git init
What it does: Initializes a brand-new, empty Git repository in your current working directory.

How it affects your code: It creates a hidden .git folder in your project directory. This folder is the "brain" where Git stores all tracking history, configurations, and commit snapshots. Your project files remain untouched, but Git starts watching the directory.

Usefulness: It turns any local folder into a version-controlled project.

How to use it:

Bash
git init
git status
What it does: Displays the state of your working directory and the staging area.

How it affects your code: Read-only command — it doesn't modify any code or history. It shows which files are modified, untracked (new), or staged for the next commit.

Usefulness: Keeps you oriented so you always know what changes are ready to save or what still needs attention before making a snapshot.

How to use it:

Bash
git status
git add
What it does: Moves changes from your working directory into the Staging Area (also called the "Index").

How it affects your code: Your actual source code doesn't change, but Git prepares these specific files to be included in your next permanent snapshot. You can add specific files or everything at once.

Usefulness: Gives you fine-grained control over what goes into a commit. You can edit five files, but only stage two of them to keep commits clean and logical.

How to use it:

Bash
git add index.py        # Stage a specific file
git add .               # Stage all modified/new files in the current directory
git commit
What it does: Takes a permanent snapshot of all files currently in the staging area and saves it to the local Git timeline.

How it affects your code: Converts staged changes into a concrete "commit" identified by a unique cryptographic hash (SHA-1). Every commit includes a message, author info, and timestamp.

Usefulness: Creates a safe restore point. If something breaks later, you can inspect or revert back to this exact point in time.

How to use it:

Bash
git commit -m "Initial commit"
git push
What it does: Uploads your local commits to a remote repository server (like GitHub, GitLab, or Bitbucket).

How it affects your code: Your local files remain the same, but the remote repository is updated to match your local branch's commit history.

Usefulness: Backs up your code in the cloud and shares your updates with collaborators.

How to use it:

Bash
git push -u origin main   # First push (sets default upstream)
git push                  # Subsequent pushes
git pull
What it does: Fetches changes from a remote repository and immediately merges them into your local branch.

How it affects your code: It updates your local files to incorporate any new commits pushed by team members or made on another machine.

Usefulness: Keeps your local workspace up to date with the latest remote version, preventing merge conflicts down the line.

How to use it:

Bash
git pull origin main


HANDS-ON--2


Explain git ignore
Explain how to ignore unwanted files using git ignore



A .gitignore file is a plain text file placed in your Git repository's root (or subdirectories) that tells Git which untracked files and folders to ignore.

Once a pattern is added to .gitignore, Git completely skips those files during git status, git add, and git commit operations.


1.Create test files and folder
2.Check status-->app.log ,log/,main.py under untracked files
3.Create and configure .gitignore
4.Verify ignored status
5.State and commit changes




HANDS-ON--3


· Explain branching and merging  

· Explain about creating a branch request in GitLab

· Explain about creating a merge request in GitLab


Ans1.In Git, a branch is a lightweight, movable pointer to a specific commit in your repository history. Branching allows you to isolate your work,such as developing a new feature, fixing a bug, or experimenting without affecting the main codebase

Ans2.Merging is the process of integrating the history and changes from one branch (e.g., a feature branch) into another branch (e.g., main). Git combines the commit histories of both branches to create a unified timeline.

Ans3.Branch Requests & Merge Requests in GitLab
In team environments using remote platforms like GitLab:

Branch Creation / Request: Rather than committing directly to the production branch, developers create a dedicated feature branch locally or via the GitLab UI.

Merge Request (MR): A Merge Request (called a Pull Request in GitHub) is a formal request to merge changes from your working branch into a target branch (like main). It allows team members to review code, run automated CI/CD tests, discuss changes, and inspect diffs before integrating the code.



HANDS-ON--4


Explain how to resolve the conflict during merge.


A merge conflict occurs when Git cannot automatically reconcile differences between two commits. This typically happens when two different branches modify the same lines of the same file in different ways, or when a file is deleted in one branch but edited in another.

Git will pause the merge process, mark the affected files as unmerged, and ask you to manually resolve the conflict.



HANDS-ON--5


Pulling (git pull): Fetches changes from the remote server and integrates them into your local branch, ensuring your local working copy has the latest updates before pushing.

Pushing (git push): Uploads your local commits (including recent conflict resolutions and .gitignore updates) to the remote repository so collaborators or reviewers can see them.



